blog/How-to-Prevent-Sending-sensitive-Data-to-APItoolkit-during-integration/index.md, before:

---
title: "How to Prevent Sending sensitive Data to APItoolkit during integration"
date: 2024-02-12T06:44:56+02:00
description: "By implementing these techniques, you gain peace of mind knowing your sensitive data is shielded within APIToolkit's captured traffic."
author: elliot
categories:
  - Data Redacting
---
![How to Prevent Sending sensitive Data to APItoolkit during integration](./How%20to%20Prevent%20Sending%20sensitive%20Data%20to%20APItoolkit%20during%20integration.png)

The growth of API-driven development opens up huge possibilities, but with great power comes big responsibility, especially for data safety. While many tools have different features, at APIToolkit, keeping data safe is our top priority and the most important thing we do.

## Why Protect Sensitive Data in APIToolkit
Data protection should be the number one concern for every organization. At apitoolkit, data security is our top priority. We offer data [redaction features](https://apitoolkit.io/docs/dashboard/redacting-fields/) that our clients can use to anonymize their sensitive information. To maintain trust, we do not allow client data to leave their servers without being properly redacted.

## What is Data Security
Data security is the practices and technologies that safeguard data from unauthorized access, use, or disclosure. These measures ensure the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of data. 
### Prerequisites
* Sign up for an APItoolkit account and get an API key
* Successfully integrate APIToolkit into your system

## How to Prevent Sensitive Data Exposure(A Multi-Layered Approach)

We understand the importance of safeguarding sensitive data, especially while using our service for API traffic capture. In this section, we will walk you through several effective techniques to protect critical information and maintain proper API security.

#### 1.  Data Masking by Shield Confidential Fields

* **Built-in Redaction:** We have pre-configured APIToolkit to automatically mask frequently sensitive fields like api_key and password from both request and response bodies. This provides a swift initial layer of protection.

* **Custom Control:** For more granular control, you can tailor which fields get redacted using specific JSONPath expressions. For instance, if your API handles credit card data, you might redact `$.credit-card.cvv` and `$.credit-card.name`.

```python
redact_res = ["$.api_key", "$.password", "$.credit-card.cvv", "$.credit-card.name"]
redact_req = ["$.credit-card.cvv", "$.credit-card.name"]
redact_headers = ["Authorization", "Cookie"]
```

#### 2. Endpoint Filtering by Excluding Sensitive Routes
We have built APIToolkit to selectively exclude capturing traffic from specific endpoints where sensitive data exchange is common, such as `/login` or `/payment`. This ensures potentially risky information isn't recorded in the first place.

```python 
excluded_routes = ["/login", "/payment"]

def should_capture(request):
    return request.path not in excluded_routes

@app.before_request
def before_request():
    if should_capture(request):
        apitoolkit.beforeRequest()
```

#### 3. Encryption by Adding an Extra Security Layer

To mitigate risks even further, we have implemented encryption for highly sensitive data (e.g., social security numbers or financial details) before it reaches APIToolkit. This extra layer protects data confidentiality even if it's inadvertently captured due to misconfiguration or accidental exposure.
```python
from cryptography.fernet import Fernet

key = Fernet.generate_key()
cipher = Fernet(key)

def encrypt_data(data):
    encrypted_data = cipher.encrypt(data.encode())
    return encrypted_data

```
#### 4. Validation and Verifying Effectiveness

Data protection shouldn't be left to chance. We have incorporated unit tests that regularly verify if redacted fields, excluded routes, and encrypted data are handled correctly as intended, giving you peace of mind about your security measures.

 ```python
 def test_password_redacted():
    response = redact(response, {"$.password": "*"})
    assert "password" not in response["user"]
    assert "[REDACTED]" in response["user"]
````
### Frequently Questioned Answers

**1. What happens if Clients accidentally send their sensitive data during integration?**
If sensitive data is accidentally sent during integration, there is no consequence. However, clients may feel uncomfortable with APIToolkit having access to these details. It's crucial to prioritize data security to maintain trust and uphold ethical standards.

**2. Are there any trade-offs or limitations to using our redaction features?**
There are no trade-offs or limitations associated with using our redaction features. The redaction features, including built-in redaction and custom control using JSONPath expressions, provide a secure way to mask sensitive information without compromising the integrity or functionality of the integration.

**3. Is there a way our clients can effectively test and verify that sensitive data is being redacted properly?**
Yes, clients can effectively test and verify the redaction of sensitive data. When fields are redacted, they appear as "[CLIENT_REDACTED]" in the log explorer. 

## Conclusion
By implementing these techniques, you gain peace of mind knowing your sensitive data is shielded within APIToolkit's captured traffic. Remember, API security is an ongoing journey. Stay informed, utilize these tools effectively, and prioritize data protection for a secure and trustworthy API ecosystem.

Commit message:

add featured image to all blog posts

blog/How-to-Prevent-Sending-sensitive-Data-to-APItoolkit-during-integration/index.md, after:

---
title: "How to Prevent Sending sensitive Data to APItoolkit during integration"
featured_image: How%20to%20Prevent%20Sending%20sensitive%20Data%20to%20APItoolkit%20during%20integration.png
date: 2024-02-12T06:44:56+02:00
description: "By implementing these techniques, you gain peace of mind knowing your sensitive data is shielded within APIToolkit's captured traffic."
author: elliot
categories:
  - Data Redacting
---
![How to Prevent Sending sensitive Data to APItoolkit during integration](./How%20to%20Prevent%20Sending%20sensitive%20Data%20to%20APItoolkit%20during%20integration.png)

The growth of API-driven development opens up huge possibilities, but with great power comes big responsibility, especially for data safety. While many tools have different features, at APIToolkit, keeping data safe is our top priority and the most important thing we do.

## Why Protect Sensitive Data in APIToolkit
Data protection should be the number one concern for every organization. At apitoolkit, data security is our top priority. We offer data [redaction features](https://apitoolkit.io/docs/dashboard/redacting-fields/) that our clients can use to anonymize their sensitive information. To maintain trust, we do not allow client data to leave their servers without being properly redacted.

## What is Data Security
Data security is the practices and technologies that safeguard data from unauthorized access, use, or disclosure. These measures ensure the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of data. 
### Prerequisites
* Sign up for an APItoolkit account and get an API key
* Successfully integrate APIToolkit into your system

## How to Prevent Sensitive Data Exposure(A Multi-Layered Approach)

We understand the importance of safeguarding sensitive data, especially while using our service for API traffic capture. In this section, we will walk you through several effective techniques to protect critical information and maintain proper API security.

#### 1.  Data Masking by Shield Confidential Fields

* **Built-in Redaction:** We have pre-configured APIToolkit to automatically mask frequently sensitive fields like api_key and password from both request and response bodies. This provides a swift initial layer of protection.

* **Custom Control:** For more granular control, you can tailor which fields get redacted using specific JSONPath expressions. For instance, if your API handles credit card data, you might redact `$.credit-card.cvv` and `$.credit-card.name`.

```python
redact_res = ["$.api_key", "$.password", "$.credit-card.cvv", "$.credit-card.name"]
redact_req = ["$.credit-card.cvv", "$.credit-card.name"]
redact_headers = ["Authorization", "Cookie"]
```

#### 2. Endpoint Filtering by Excluding Sensitive Routes
We have built APIToolkit to selectively exclude capturing traffic from specific endpoints where sensitive data exchange is common, such as `/login` or `/payment`. This ensures potentially risky information isn't recorded in the first place.

```python 
excluded_routes = ["/login", "/payment"]

def should_capture(request):
    return request.path not in excluded_routes

@app.before_request
def before_request():
    if should_capture(request):
        apitoolkit.beforeRequest()
```

#### 3. Encryption by Adding an Extra Security Layer

To mitigate risks even further, we have implemented encryption for highly sensitive data (e.g., social security numbers or financial details) before it reaches APIToolkit. This extra layer protects data confidentiality even if it's inadvertently captured due to misconfiguration or accidental exposure.
```python
from cryptography.fernet import Fernet

key = Fernet.generate_key()
cipher = Fernet(key)

def encrypt_data(data):
    encrypted_data = cipher.encrypt(data.encode())
    return encrypted_data

```
#### 4. Validation and Verifying Effectiveness

Data protection shouldn't be left to chance. We have incorporated unit tests that regularly verify if redacted fields, excluded routes, and encrypted data are handled correctly as intended, giving you peace of mind about your security measures.

 ```python
 def test_password_redacted():
    response = redact(response, {"$.password": "*"})
    assert "password" not in response["user"]
    assert "[REDACTED]" in response["user"]
````
### Frequently Questioned Answers

**1. What happens if Clients accidentally send their sensitive data during integration?**
If sensitive data is accidentally sent during integration, there is no consequence. However, clients may feel uncomfortable with APIToolkit having access to these details. It's crucial to prioritize data security to maintain trust and uphold ethical standards.

**2. Are there any trade-offs or limitations to using our redaction features?**
There are no trade-offs or limitations associated with using our redaction features. The redaction features, including built-in redaction and custom control using JSONPath expressions, provide a secure way to mask sensitive information without compromising the integrity or functionality of the integration.

**3. Is there a way our clients can effectively test and verify that sensitive data is being redacted properly?**
Yes, clients can effectively test and verify the redaction of sensitive data. When fields are redacted, they appear as "[CLIENT_REDACTED]" in the log explorer. 

## Conclusion
By implementing these techniques, you gain peace of mind knowing your sensitive data is shielded within APIToolkit's captured traffic. Remember, API security is an ongoing journey. Stay informed, utilize these tools effectively, and prioritize data protection for a secure and trustworthy API ecosystem.
