---
title: "Resource Modeling in Rest API Design: The Guidelines"
date: 2022-05-24T08:05:56+02:00
---
Resource modeling is a software for resource management that lets you see resource data visually. With this, you may more effectively plan how your resources are distributed over the course of several projects. Additionally, you may build models to evaluate different situations, which is a crucial tool for scenario prediction.

## Resource Model for Rest API
Establishing and upholding the idea of a resource model is crucial when creating a collection of RESTful APIs
For several reasons, a public API's resource model and the application's domain object model should be separate (decoupled).
- Allow for mismatched HTTP/object impedance - The hypermedia document-oriented view of the domain is the resource model. This is how HTTP operates, which is frequently different from how your object-oriented domain model works.
Resources can be more specialized than domain classes due to the restrictions of the consistent interface (HTTP methods) imposed by REST. Resources can also be more specific than domain objects or entities. Theres are other factors that can affect resource granularity including network performance, the size of representations in terms of data, and the data usage patterns of clients’, and  data models rather than what is contained in the object or data,. As they might have various caching strategies, creating distinct resources for data with various lifetimes or update intervals can further increase speed.
- Hide complexity - API client developers should be taken into consideration while designing the resource model. One thing you should do is hide any extra complexity, including any historical baggage, in the domain model of the program. To expose fewer, simpler concepts in the resource model, can entail aggregating your domain model.
- Maintain a constant external interface while permitting internal evolution - As your application develops or your needs change, you'll want to be able to update your domain model. On the contrary, a public API must evolve more gradually to guarantee stability for API users. Although it's a last resort, versioning your APIs and resources can help with this. You don't want your internal advancements to be slowed down by the necessity for stability in your APIs. The external-facing resource model can be decoupled to get around this restriction and keep your public API from becoming too brittle.

## The Guidlines to Designing Your Resource-Model
While desiggning a resource model for Rest APIs using a top-down, upfront approach yields the best outcomes, this approcah makes your API easy to read and less ambigious and brings in a more consistency. Here is a simple guidline to follow when designing your resource-model
1. Define your Resourses: By defining your RESTful resources and their representations top-down, you may accomplish the previously mentioned goal of developing a resource model that is independent of the application domain model. This strategy, also known as contract-first API design, involves creating an API from scratch rather than reversing engineering it from the application's existing object model. It offers the chance to develop a collection of assets and representations that, in terms of complexity, consistency, and performance, are best for the API service and its API clients. Additionally, it enables you to model resource meta-data that isn't included in the domain model, including hyperlinks that describe resource linkages.
2. Use of RAD Technology: RAD stands for Rapid Application Development. The majority of development platforms today have RAD tools that automatically generate API endpoints from your current domain model and entities, such as Spring Data REST for JavaSpring. To construct APIs more quickly, these tools employ the opposing bottom-up methodology. Although you can deprecate these APIs more rapidly if they are only used internally, I wouldn't advise utilizing these tools to create public APIs because they will probably be too brittle.
3. Use Agile Techniques: Agile techniques that are currently in vogue favor evolutionary design over upfront (planned) design. This is useful for creating many different types of software, but it is inappropriate for creating any form of public API. To make it easier for customers to construct API clients and to save ongoing maintenance costs, public web APIs must offer a reliable and consistent user interface to a service. This contradicts the principles of evolutionary design. Before publishing any of the APIs, design as much of your resource model as you can. This will increase your APIs' consistency and help them last longer, reducing the need to update your API / resource version or deprecate APIs.



